One of the other things that we do is we try for each of those representatives or senators, we try to get them to come to a hospital, a health center, a clinic in their own home district, in their own area, read to kids, be there, and, you know, make it real to them that this is because we have those 2,000 programs.
We have programs in every state.
this department does is try to get these sites to connect up with their representatives so that the representatives realize it's here.
It's, you know, everyone likes to go to the local children's hospital and be photographed.
Reading to kids and handing out books is a, it's a great little thing to, it's a great incentive to get them to come and learn about what physicians are doing.
You know, it really stands out in my mind and it's something that you said in this lecture that you gave, which I
found on the internet, but where you're talking about ten books, basically, during this period of six months to five years old, that the cost is about twenty-five dollars.
Twenty-five bucks.
Well, in the medical world, that's pretty true.
One extra unnecessary blood test, you're there.
And how vital it turns out to be.
Anyway, I'll be in touch as I proceed on this, and I thank you so much.
You're welcome.
Thanks for what you're doing.
It's wonderful.
So the selection really is by, the content is not really, I know the content's important, but really you're following a program of what's appropriate at this particular level, right?
How are you?
Pleasure to meet you.
I'm the director of finance and administration.
A very important person.
Regarding the sacks of paper, I think, at this point, making sure there's no lit match.
They didn't say it.
Are we now compliant with the fire code?
I know.
I went and had a piece of pita bread yesterday, and I took it out of the toaster too early.
And after I walked out of the room, there was a fire.
And someone went and got the extinguisher.
I don't even want to know.
Oh, God.
That's funny.
Okay.
This place is big.
Yeah, it's kind of a war.
Go ahead.
This is now, that side is kind of administration.
This is programs.
Everybody.
This is Joel, Emma, Helen.
And I'm Nick, Nick Bazbrains.
I'm writing about your program.
And when people are interested in starting a program, they start here with Helen and, you know, we say they're interested in the program and she kind of walks them through the process of putting in an application and finding out about
Water Reach Out and Read program does.
And then this department is how we keep in touch with the programs.
We monitor them.
They do semi-annual progress reports.
We keep them in touch with each other.
There's just sort of an enormous amount of information, information management, and sort of program support that goes on here.
Okay.
We're heading for you, Jackie.
We're going to end up with you as a book catalog in the book.
So, again, this is... Hello.
Hi.
Pleased to meet you.
This is... Nick.
Nice to meet you.
And we're going to also get you materials as you're going.
You need materials, right?
Bunmi is in charge of the Massachusetts Coalition of Reach Out and Read programs, and her background is actually in education.
And Jackie...
I promise you, you're going to meet people with backgrounds in education and library as we wander through the program.
Jackie's very involved with the books, the book choice and the book catalog, and you asked me about how we choose the books.
I haven't actually found you a catalog yet, but if you want to go with Jackie, I'll find you some materials.
Oh, great, thanks.
My book.
I was wondering if you would find the autograph.
Oh, it's my pleasure.
Great.
Are you kidding?
to Jackie Miller, National Programs Coordinator.
Well, obviously, I'm interested in content as well as how you go about selecting the book that you use for it.
Do you want to sit down?
Sure.
Do you mind?
No, no, no.
Do you mind if I shoot a picture to you?
You can move the chair.
OK.
Oh, let's see.
Don't mind.
Maybe.
I have a digital camera here.
What's wrong with that?
That's a nice picture.
Go ahead.
Where would you like me to start?
Well, I was talking with Dr. Klaas specifically about how the books function, 10 books over five years, and how does she, is it possible even to measure the impact of individual
I guess it's a lot of them.
Well, we have a lot of anecdotal evidence.
The parents going back to the doctors and telling them their own stories.
We also have research pieces that do prove that it does make a difference overall.
Some of the stories that we hear from the doctors are just so heart-touching, and it's wonderful.
Like what?
Can you think of anything?
I know it's hard to come up with one.
But what kinds of things do you hear?
Well, I had this crusty old nurse come up to me at one of the shows I went to, and she said in this terrific Louisiana accent, when I first heard we were going to be giving books away to the kids, I thought it was the dumbest thing.
Really?
It was just another giveaway program that would fall apart in two months.
But I've got to tell you, the kids love it, the parents love it, and the parents are coming in on time because they know their kids are going to get a book, and their mothers are telling us,
All their kids want to do is read, have their mothers read to them.
And you see, as Dr. Kless was saying, sometimes, and it may be that these are the only ten books that some of these kids will get.
You would hope, on the other hand, that it would encourage them to augment the, I mean, it's not just the one book you're getting every six months.
But if it's just the ten, then the selection process that you do becomes very important, doesn't it?
Maybe you can just talk a little bit about that.
Well, Scholastic, somebody here knew Steve Cohen from Scholastic when this all started.
And he and several other people at Scholastic fortunately had the vision to see that we had the potential to become something big when they first met us.
And so the mandate that's now over at Scholastic and the person I work with there, Deborah Shaw,
is that they're to help us grow.
And so they actually create and print and mail the catalog.
They warehouse the books, ship the books, are processing.
It's fabulous, isn't it?
It's an incredible gift to us.
And this is your catalog here?
Yes, and I can give you as many copies as you like.
Oh, good.
Excellent.
Terrific.
And this was done to help facilitate the purchase of the books.
Because all they need to do is just send in the order.
We have accounts set up for them there.
The money's taken out of the account, and the books are shipped for free.
And the reason the catalog exists is not only because it saves the medical professionals time, but because a lot of people, you know, PhDs, masters and public bills, were terrified of choosing books for kids.
They just felt, they didn't feel qualified.
So Scholastic was their terrific backlog, a back list of books, and from other publishers as well.
I mean, it was put in.
And in truth, it was done by Pat Cowan, and she still works with us on the camera.
I think I said her name.
Yeah, down there.
And Pat's qualifications, she's got great taste, four kids and a bunch of grandkids.
And every so often, there's this cranky phone call from somebody demanding to know, what professionals do you have vetting this?
So the only use I've gotten on my library degree is to say, I'm qualified.
And I think it's absolutely hilarious.
Well, because you think, certainly it's cause for concern when you think of how people really be challenged.
lists and books that are banned for any number of different opaque reasons?
Oh, I quickly learned in bookselling when I was working for a publisher, they don't even try to sell anything with a witch in it past the Mason-Dixon line.
It's just not going to go.
But they're mostly chosen for the quality of the writing, for
Does it get a reaction on the people?
We're trying to get more of the books that people think of as classics, the Mike Mulligan, the Meg Leith of that one, because what we found is that the residents and the doctors, when they're... When the residents and doctors look at the books when they come in for a reach-out-and-read training, and they start going, I had that when I was a kid.
They get so excited about being able to pass on a childhood favorite to the children they're working with.
It still resonates after all these years.
Oh, definitely.
It's amazing.
You see all these wonderfully educated adults grabbing books out of each other's hands because they had that book when they were a kid, and they have such fond memories of it.
So you're striving for something very fundamental at each level.
And I assume that there's a variety of books that you have at each level.
So that's one book for the six-month-old child and one book for the year-old child.
That's correct.
It's a number of books within each level.
And does this catalog give some sense of how you're progressing from Washington to Sendak in there?
That's great.
Yeah.
the milestones, what children will do with books at different ages.
You do?
In here?
Yeah.
Oh, good.
I wanted to have some materials, and Helen is actually making you copies of some of the others, and we can go through all of them later.
And this is fabulous, too.
I don't have to ask her any titles.
They're all here.
And when you guys are young, will you introduce me to Ron, and then eventually find your way back to me?
This is great.
Thank you.
So what we're trying to
to get the doctors to do is to understand that they can use the book as a developmental tool so that if you see that the mother is taking no interest in the child's excitement over the book, that's telling you that there's a problem between the parent-child bond.
If you have the one-year-old who can't turn the pages with the pincer grip, that's telling you there's a problem.
And it also can help speed up the exam because you need to know, does that three-year-old know how to speak a full sentence?
And a lot of three-year-olds are very shy around the stranger, the doctor now.
And by holding out a book and saying, this looks like a dog and it's really an elephant.
He's got this three-year-old.
That's an elephant.
You know the child can speak a whole sentence.
See, what really pleases me about this is that
and I don't think this is apparent in a lot of the stories that you see about the program, is that it's just as useful to the physician as it is to the kid.
It's really a diagnostic tool for the physician, because you're assessing performance and response and measuring that against
what others are doing, and I hadn't even thought of that.
I thought it was really kind of a one-way thing where you're helping, you're really promoting literacy and reading, because that is a good thing, but it goes well beyond that.
Yes, and one of the really great things is, in a lot of cases, it's the chance for the doctor to say something terrific about the kid, the parent.
Many of our trainers will teach the other doctors how to say,
Look how your child is reacting to that book.
He is so bright.
And it's a positive interaction.
And it's a chance to do something that makes a difference other than does your child wear a helmet and they're riding a bike?
Fire safety, do you have a gun in the house?
Those just aren't fun interactions.
This is fun for them.
And the kids become really used to getting the books.
And there's one doctor in New York who actually will write
the child's name and his name into the book.
Oh, that's wonderful.
And the child is so flattered.
It's almost like he's inscribing a copy of the book.
Well, he is.
It is a gift, isn't it?
Yes, and because the doctor is important in the eyes of the parent, the child realizes that this very important person is writing his name and the child's name.
I hadn't thought of this.
Does the book come as a gift, or is it something in another context?
Well, the way it's supposed to work is when the doctor enters the exam room, he's supposed to have an age-appropriate book in his hand.
And sometimes if they're really good at it, they'll have one or two or three books so the child can make a choice.
And so it is given as a gift in the beginning rather than just out here as you're leaving sort of thing.
Like the lollipop.
Yeah, exactly.
Because you've been a good kid.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
So the child gets a chance.
It's not a reward.
Yeah.
I guess maybe that's the better word.
Is it regarded as a reward or no?
No.
It's an essential element of the process, right?
Yes, and it's almost perceived as a, I'm so glad to have you here, I brought you something.
And the kids really enjoy it.
And it's a book.
Wow, isn't that wonderful?
Yes.
And I'll have to give you Robert's email address.
Nobody explains it.
Harry does a great job explaining it.
This is Robert who now?
Needleman.
Yes, I'd love to.
I'd love to touch with him.
I have my notebook in a minute.
Oh, that's Robert.
But maybe you can do some e-mail.
Yeah, okay.
I'd be happy to.
Good.
I'll e-mail you.
Actually, yeah, you're here.
Okay.
Yeah.
Robert is... He started this as a resident of Boston Medical Center.
And he was reading to his daughter at home, and he just wanted the opportunity for all the children to have books.
Is he the gentleman who now went to Cleveland?
Is that right?
Yes.
I'm sure I mentioned him there, too.
But it's especially fun to watch Robert talk about his interactions with the kids.
Now, is he doing it out there as well now, or has he...?
Robert spends a fair amount of time traveling.
Tomorrow he's in New York City doing a talk.
about the love of reading.
Can you just write that email address on the back of your card for me?
Yeah, sure.
If you don't mind it.
He just wrote, oh, he's the, I have that.
Oh, you do?
The eighth edition?
Well, I get, I get review books.
And, and that's actually one of the books I've set aside as an important book.
It doesn't have to be a work of literature.
It can even be the Sears-Robot catalog as an influential book.
I'm going to give you his home number, too.
Terrific.
He's much easier to reach at home than he is.
He's only working part-time as a physician, and the rest of the time he's either wandering the country talking for us.
Well, then I have to talk to him.
He's a very beloved speaker around here.
Excellent.
And he put a chapter into the exhibition of the Spock book about reading a lot.
And actually, I can probably, if you leave me your email address, I know Robert's talk tomorrow in New York City.
He forwarded the PowerPoint to them, and I can get a copy and forward it to you.
N.A.
Baz Baines at AOL.
Very simple, but don't forget the A. There's also nickandgentlymad.com, which is my website.
It's kind of fun.
It's a pretty good website.
It's still being developed, but I get a lot of things in there, reviews for the books.
I'm going to put up a lot of new literary essays.
I just time, time is the thing.
This is great.
Excellent.
So let me tell you about how publishers send me review copies.
Harcourt just sent me a package today.
And sometimes I'm horrified at what they send me.
And sometimes I'm abused.
And what I like, I pass around to get some other opinions.
Pat looks up and through.
And then Deborah Shaw with the classic starts doing the dirty work of negotiating discounts.
You're talking hundreds of copies, aren't you?
If we buy the stock directly from the publisher, it usually starts at about 2,500 books.
But a lot of times we try to see if we can negotiate the book club rights as well.
That's what you should, your title to that, I don't think.
Yeah, as well, it's cheaper, too.
Say I like them on that scale.
Yes.
As an author, you must be thrilled.
Well, as you probably know from the publishers, you might be a little more aware than most authors.
Publishers keep their authors in the dark.
I don't have a clue as to what Splendor Letters is sold.
Except I know it's done very well.
Nobody's complained about it.
But I have no idea.
I was signing in Indiana at the Lilly Library.
And somebody said, well, how many editions of Gentle Madness are there?
I said, well, eight hardcovers and at least three of the paperbacks.
And they don't really look pretty.
Well, yeah, but I do look, and I just see why I opened up the paperback.
It was the sixth paperback edition.
You know, it's very easily discernible.
I didn't know it.
Holt never told me.
I mean, so that's 14 printings of a book.
But I didn't know that until I looked into, you know, I said, well, I hope they got the corrections in that sense, because they're beautiful things that I want to get in there.
Yeah.
No, I had, um... They never tell you.
No, it... They don't want to tell you.
Well, that's very true.
I mean, a lot of times they just don't have the people to surround and chat with the authors as much as they might like to.
But a lot of times it's done to save the publisher the aggravation.
Sometimes knowledge is a dangerous thing.
Well, the way I find out is I buy copies of my own books.
And so the woman I deal with, and I say, well, what have we got?
She'll tell me how many you've got in the warehouse.
And I go, well, how have we done?
And I'm not supposed to tell you that.
I say, well, come on, you can tell me I'm buying 100 copies, about 60 copies or whatever.
And so I'll tell you, but it's the agent, you're right.
I say, hey, they told you how many you've done.
I mean, he doesn't know either.
Oh, no.
You know, because you get the royalty statements every six months.
And whatever you sell, they will hold out 40% for returns.
And I never had a 40% return, but that doesn't get factored into your statement.
Oh, yeah.
So the trick is to get it as much of an advance as you can.
I never believed that when I started writing.
Whenever I sell, I'll learn.
But I've now learned over a period of years
absolutely get as much as you can.
Oh, front of us.
Oh, yeah.
And then I figured that's what you're kind of getting paid, you know?
Yeah.
No, I've had, I was once when I was working over Kate's Mystery Books.
I pretty much worked everywhere in New England.
This very sweet young kid who had just written a mystery with Little Brown came in, and I was stripping paperbacks that day, and he wanted to talk about
you know, having a sign and a cake.
So I told him, sit down.
I handed him a bunch of books and started stripping.
And I gave him a crash course in a hard life of being an author.
And he was just horrified.
And he said, I didn't realize there was so many things they never tell me.
They drive you crazy.
But I have to say, getting, like I said, getting world things on that book.
I'm going to be 10 years old.
Because I've got like a nothing, a chance not to begin with.
Whatever it earns and earns.
But you never have a clue.
And then it'll be like you get something, you get a statement in May, but that's for the period that ended in December.
And I know I had a good... Oh, and the deals that are cut, it's not... Most people don't realize it's not just, you know, you go to a bookstore,
You buy the book.
And the author gets 10 or 15 percent or everything.
It's all tied into what market the book was sold in, what discount was given out on that particular sale.
That's why I'm with Hoppers.
I was going to go biking after Alice Holtz, and it was a very complicated deal.
I mean, if they sell to Amazon, X number, or Barnes & Noble, then my
I mean, the royalty goes down proportionally, and we adamantly oppose that.
I mean, 15 percent, I mean, it's a pittance to begin with, and whatever deal you make selling a book, fine, but I shouldn't have to.
The Harpers did give us, I have to say, a very clean, straight deal.
Yeah, but by the time you got to Harvard, you had already taken a few lessons.
Well, yeah, I was leaving Holt to go to
following an editor at Viking, and they made a generous offer.
But then it was just fraught with all of these different provisions that made it less interesting.
And then Hoppers heard that I was available, and they came in and said they got more money.
And they had a very clean deal, and they had to buy me out of hope.
It was just wonderful.
It was just freedom.
And I liked Holt, but everybody I worked with had gone.
Yeah.
And I was an orphan twice.
By the time my second book came out, I had nine editors.
Oh, yeah.
I'm not surprised.
You know, nine editors.
And now I've had the same guy for the last three books, which is you, Van Dusen, and I do.
I hope I stay with him forever.
I'm sorry for going off on you folks.
I mean, this is not even the worst example I've had recently.
This came in yesterday.
And what I can't get a lot of publishers, especially... And this is teeth, they're not for biting today, to be clear.
Well, what I can't get a lot of the publishers to understand, it's worse with the smaller ones, but I still have a hard time with the bigger ones, is that Reach Out and Read just has good storybooks.
I mean, I would not read teeth or not for biting for a bedtime story.
This is not a book that an adult is going to go in 20 years.
I have that book.
Yeah.
My wife and I do a monthly review of children's books from the newspaper.
Oh.
And we just rejected one yesterday.
It was on the same.
It looked quite well done, but it was stinky, smelly feet.
My friend has sticky, smelly feet.
So what are we teaching?
What's the point here?
You know, I mean, I guess you like someone despite whatever they are.
I can see where they're going with it, but as you say, is it something that I'd enjoy reading to my kid at NIDER, and is it one that would resonate over a period of years?
I don't think so.
So it didn't make the cut.
There's such a Puritan streak in the people of the U.S.
We cannot allow a child to just enjoy a book unless it is teaching them, teaching someone's lesson.
Because I'm forever fending off the... But it teaches...
moral to teach us character.
We're in a whole new age of children's books.
That was the original kids' book, where it did have that moral didactic function, I guess.
But what's wrong with just enjoying the book and being amused by it?
And if you pick up a little something, that's great.
I know when I'm doing these reviews,
Most people, most reviewers, they're looking for, if you look at the library journal reviews in particular, well, this is good for this and that and that and just learn about the importance of bond.
Do you think a kid is really picking that up?
I'd hope so, but I think if I'm writing a children's book, that's not really what I'm trying to do.
I hope to write about half a dozen kids' books, by the way.
I know exactly what they're going to be.
I shouldn't have this one.
I have to transcribe.
So you're just talking again about books that have a power to... Well, children, because there's so much computers, TV, whatever, children aren't told or shown in any real way the power that books can have
the whole thrust of this book I'm writing, by the way, so you can see.
But not just the Lincoln book, but also the book that we're talking about here.
How books affect people's lives.
I say books have changed the world.
But if you change one person with a book, that's why the title Every Book It's Reader is not bad.
A book can reach one person.
But if that one person had examples of that, I think you know.
Oh, there are plenty of examples out there of people
finding the right book at the right moment.
Do you think?
Can you think of anything off the top of your head?
I'm really looking for examples, by the way.
Well, my friend Anne Nawawi, who's just an incredible woman, she's a retired librarian, and it's not a major example, but at a point in her life where she was terrified, I think, if I remember the story correctly, she was
being forced to learn how to swim, much against her will.
And instead of doing some sort of bibliotherapy about a book on not being afraid to swim, I can't even remember what book it was she was reading, but it was about somebody facing much worse.
And she realized, if he could do this, it was a biography I remember that much, I can learn how to swim.
So she overcame her phobia about the water.
because she was reading this particular book.
I, let's see, for me, I lost my husband very young.
And, I'm sorry I'm so bad with the title, the worst possible moments.
Don't mess the word, it will come.
Okay.
They made a movie out of it.
Rock Hudson, who was a semi-dreadful in it.
Jane Weinman.
But it had an impact on you, obviously.
It had a critical moment.
It was a story about a woman who lost her husband.
All that heaven allows, that's it.
Say it again?
All that heaven allows.
And it was the book of the film that... Well, when I discovered... I'd seen the film about Rock Hudson was dreadful and not given any thought until I happened to notice...
that it was based on a book.
So I tracked down a copy of the book, going through three library systems to do so.
It's from the 50s.
And I read it in the ninth chapter.
There's this one paragraph about why, after everybody assumed that life should have been moving on and she should be just fine, stop your grieving, hurry up attitude from other people.
The year is up or whatever.
Yes.
Oh, yes.
It seems to be the day after the anniversary.
People want you moving on.
Exactly.
This one paragraph touched me so much about why she was still grieving that I went out and found a copy of this book, which was not an easy thing to do, even in today's age.
And even though it's a second edition with no jacket, nobody's taking this book from me.
All That Heaven Allows.
And it's a novel, or it's a...?
It's a novel.
Yeah.
And it was just... I was really surprised.
It's written by a husband and wife.
As a work of fiction?
Yeah.
Which is very unusual, isn't it?
It's collaborative.
Yes.
Although, from the writing, I suspect the wife did most of it.
Yeah.
Well, anyway, that's... I'd love to do about five.
I write, you know, I'm committed to literacy.
We write, we've been doing children's book reviews for five years together.
I've been doing it myself longer.
Why not?
It's kind of fun.
I think, you know, it's a nice, tight picture book.
It's just kind of a, I guess, writing it in a way that's accessible, but it's not writing down.
It's really an enormous challenge to me.
I mean, I can write 500,000 words a day if I have to, which is usually my pace.
But this one I've been toying with for five years.
I think it's much harder to write for children.
Oh, I think so.
Maurice Sendak takes forever to do a little 300-word book.
But look at it, every word totally matters.
Yeah.
And I'd like to do that one.
I'd like to do one on Phyllis, you know, going before that board to find out where she was, this African-American woman, slave, actually capable of writing.
How is this former Aborigine, as they described her?
What would that meaning have been like?
That book of poems that comes out of that, you know, so you've got a nice little book there.
James Logan, I wrote about him, Gentle Madness.
Penns, William Penns I, a representative, a great bibliophile, a brilliant man.
He had to leave all of his books behind.
He came here in 1699, and there was one book that was driving him nuts over 30 years, and he finally wrote to their agent in Ireland.
It's in General Madness.
And they found the book in the bookstore, 25 years, still there.
And then it's returned to him.
It takes a year and a half to get to him.
And he writes in it in Latin, the rarest book.
And I've handled that book.
What a great story.
This is probably the only owner of a first edition Algonquin Bible, the Indian, Elliot's Indian Bible.
Read it in the Indian language.
Because he had Indians in his house.
Brilliant, brilliant, brilliant man.
And his library becomes a lot.
The Library Company of Philadelphia and all that, and Benjamin Franklin wrote his obituary.
But I think that one book, again, that one book story, I'm obsessed.
He's the guy who said, Books are my disease.
That could be the title of that, too, couldn't it?
That would be a great book title.
Don't you think?
Oh, yeah.
Books are my... There were so many of us who would understand that one.
There were plain titles there.
I'm sorry.
I'm cursing myself when I go to read.
I'm listening to myself talk on the tape.
But anyway, so we're talking, oh, that's a nice book.
You're welcome to have that copy if you like.
This is something I would love to be able to get from Houghton Misselin for our own catalog.
But right now, the cost would be too much for us.
But if I commissioned someone to do a book for us, this is what I would have asked them.
And this is, we're talking about book.
Yes.
It's a great Hilton Mifflin title.
Yeah.
And it is how old?
Probably two years old now.
Oh, this is great.
And the sales rep over there knows I want this.
And when it's gotten to a point where they're willing to... How about you ascribe this to me?
You don't mind?
Well, it's not my book.
Well, you're giving it to me as a gift.
Reach out and read.
That would be kind of nice.
See the kind of thing that I collect.
All right.
Well, just as a gift.
Is it cost?
It's cost.
We offer a very significant discount for our books because in our start-up application, we tell people to determine their budget by multiplying $2.50 by number of well-child visits between the ages of six months and five years, and then we give them a grant based on that budget.
Unfortunately, it's very hard to find books to put in our catalog that are $2.50.
Most of them are $3 or $3.85.
We try to keep the cost down, but books are expensive, which is part of the reason a lot of people don't own books.
So this one lists for $10.99.
So you're probably trying to get it for, and that isn't enough.
I'm just curious.
We would ask for an 80% discount.
If I were the author, I'd do it in a second, see, if they asked me to do it.
What great a gesture could you do?
Well, the
Potents are tough for you to work with.
Yes.
What we're trying to do, Deborah, Charles, Pat Cohen, and I, is to go after the publishers.
Pat and I go in and sock them up with our
We're going to reach out and read.
We're wonderful.
And this is a pro-boto kind of thing, too.
I mean... Well, they'll make money off of us.
They will, too, absolutely.
You know, when they sell books on the Remainers, they sell them for $3 or something.
My books, you know, or the Patients and Fortitude, they... I said, it's not out of print, but it's in the trading back.
But you can buy what we're selling.
I said, I don't want you selling any of these high cameras.
I'll buy them all.
I just don't want them.
It offends me that you're selling them for $3.48.
Yes, and I'm finding them in supermarkets at $7.98.
Yeah, really, and I'll buy them, and I'll give them to people, which is what I saw for several hundred.
But at $3.42, they're making money.
Yes, they are.
That's my point, isn't it?
And that's a big $35 book that's 600-and-something pages with two signatures of photographs in it.
And sheets, and the whole works, and a gorgeous dust jacket.
And if they can put us across them, 50 cents to make a book, a dollar?
Yeah, it depends on the description.
Yeah, what is this, down in China?
I'll bet.
Yeah, probably.
Singapore?
Yeah.
It doesn't tell us, anyway.
Right.
Well, it's someplace here.
Yeah.
No, but Singapore is always a good guess.
Singapore is a good guess.
The Chinese are doing so now.
I knew Eric Carle came in yesterday.
It was done in China.
They did a fabulous job on the color separation.
I was at the book fair when his very quiet cricket came out, the first book of the computer chip.
Was that fun?
It was fun, but they hadn't quite gotten the technology of the computer chip yet.
Yeah, it goes off.
You're just carrying it.
It goes off, you know?
So imagine 20 cartons of that book chirping at you.
I love that.
Did you go to the book expo?
I haven't gone in a couple of years.
I go to it when it's in New York.
Well, it's been in Chicago.
I always scare people because I walk into the booth and they'll say, I work for a literacy organization.
I'm a salesperson.
Yeah, because they figure you're looking for handouts, right?
Yeah, so my second sentence is, we buy the books.
Oh, great.
Well, that might be nice of you giving this.
I hope I didn't deprive you of your copy.
No, I have a second copy.
That's very kind.
Thank you.
Yeah, so it's mostly a matter of money, and
of getting the books we want.
And most of your funding comes from where?
Is it?
Federal, state, grants.
We'll take money from pretty much anyone.
And how large is the staff here?
It's 20 full-time, part-time people.
And this is the national headquarters, of course, so you're buying, basically, for everyone.
Well, they choose one book.
And then we have some people who really love to wheel and deal with the publishers, and they go off and do their own thing.
If they fundraise money of their own or if they choose the reimbursement option, they can go buy the books whatever they like.
But I would say 98% of people choose to have a prepaid account sent up.
And now that the economy has taken, took a downturn, I need to be pursued by publishers who just want to be part of it.
Because as we get larger and better known, people are realizing
They give away three million books a year.
We need to be part of this.
This is a market.
It's astonishing that it's taken them so long to discern that.
Well, publishers are still very much in the mindset of we deal with bookstores.
And so they're still calling it special sales when it's outside of a bookstore.
Yeah, and it doesn't even count in your numbers.
I mean, for the author, I'll bet the author really gets stung on that a little bit.
But for this, I wouldn't mind.
We'd hope to get something out of it.
Oh, yeah.
And I wouldn't want to deprive an author or a publisher of making a profit on the book, because that means they get to publish the next book.
Sure.
But shall we scare them off a little bit?
by walking in and saying 80%.
We negotiate a bit, and if we can find out if they're doing a print run of the book we want, we'll pack our order onto it, and that makes it a little bit easier.
80%, when you think about it, it's not that bad, because there's no distributor that they're paying.
There's no bookstore.
And so their margin is really not going to be, it's going to be a difference of 10 or 15%, maybe.
And no returns.
How can you possibly beat that?
It's pretty good, actually.
Well, the part that makes it difficult for them is because the purchase order is coming from Scholastic.
Mm-hmm.
And even though publishing is a very interactive business with other publishers, the idea of having to sell to Scholastic at that discount just... Yeah, I know.
But they see your numbers, so it has to have... Yeah.
Anyway, they'll come around.
Yeah, so they start smelling the money, and I actually just had to call off one of the publishers.
They read in our newsletter about a huge grant that our person up in Alaska thought.
And so the next thing I know is this guy's following me.
Do you know anything about this?
And he's naming the publisher to me.
I just got this thing about buying books from them, and Paul doesn't know anything about purchasing books.
He was just going to deal with us and Scholastic because we have a way of dealing with very huge, very big purchases.
And I was a little bit nipped because I had told the sales rep, if you do anything big, I need to know about it.
And so I called her and she was a little surprised.
And I had to tell her, this is not a big universe.
Especially the book world.
There's such a cottage industry as that.
Everybody knows what's going on.
Yes, um, Harry actually met Harriet Zefert, who's got her own publishing company now.
Had to talk.
That's her husband.
That's Harriet's husband.
Oh, that's funny.
No, they just started their own publishing company.
That's cute.
Yeah.
That's wonderful.
Well, I think we've had a great start, and I will contact.
Pardon me.
Ron Bailey is the Director of National Programs for Reach Out and Read.
Well, I was just saying that one of the interesting things about interviewing staff here is that all the people who send their resumes, even for the most technical of jobs, and we have quite a few of those now, really are interested in books and they're interested in reading and have a strong belief that reading was
a really important part of their lives.
So it's wonderful in the interviews because you can always start the conversation that way about the love of reading and your shared love of reading.
If you start talking with them about SQL databases, which is really what they're going to be doing later, it's a shift.
But you always have that base in talking to people who want to work here.
It's wonderful.
And they end up here, which is good.
So what's your background or how do you come as a
First of all, I was a kindergarten teacher for many, many years and ran a private kindergarten in D.C.
And then went back to graduate school and actually studied instructional design, focusing on how you train adults in the workplace, how you actually retrain people while they're working.
And this was a really interesting project for me because we were trying to
to retrain doctors in their workplace, and it's challenging because they have no time for one thing, and the other thing is that they believe they don't have anything else to learn.
So how we teach doctors some of the stuff that every good kindergarten or preschool teacher knows is what I'm about.
And give me a couple of examples of what you mean, what kinds of things you have to treat.
Well, you know, things like book language.
You used this word, book language.
Every teacher knows that book language is different from conversational language, and doctors have never stopped to think about that.
When you read aloud to children, there's a cadence to book language that is different.
Or the fact that when you're reading to children, if you, you know, your eyes or your finger sort of lead you to this left-right sequence, every teacher knows that.
And doctors don't, you know, there was no place in their education to learn that.
And so this ended the equation because?
Because you want them to understand why they're doing this, that kids
Kids who are in preschool or kids who are affluent and are read to a lot have the advantage of this book language before they get to kindergarten, even before they get to preschool.
And kids from families that don't read to their kids don't have that experience.
So if the doctor can pass on even the tiniest amount of this information to parents about what reading aloud gets for the kids,
it's really important.
And also if you can grab them with those ideas of, well, they just haven't thought much about it, really.
So, tell me a little bit about the programs that you used to do.
Yeah.
Well, my job is really to keep us going in now 2075 clinics and hospitals across the country.
And we're
The interesting part, I think, is that we're a tiny part of any one of those clinics.
I mean, we're probably 150th of what they do, and we have to insinuate ourselves in there in some way.
First for the training piece, first for getting even an hour with a group of pediatricians and nurses to train them in some of these basics, and then to teach them a little bit about
how to use our grant, which we give to them, and how to raise some money on their own for books to sustain their program.
So I have a staff of six, and that's, you've got Jackie, who's in charge of organizing that training effort, and she deploys about 100 regional trainers who are all physicians who go out and do training for us.
And then we have a
a very sophisticated database which sort of keeps track of the sites and our grants to them.
We are an interesting organization in that we're always raising money for ourselves.
We have to raise several million dollars every year, but almost all that money is granted out to these programs.
So we pay for half of whatever their books cost in the first year and a quarter,
of the cost in subsequent years.
So because that's federal money, I end up with auditors and all the people who want to know how their money was spent.
So a lot of our work has to do with keeping track of sub-granting money and making sure that people are in compliance with the model to some degree or the other.
take some pieces and leave some pieces, but making sure that everybody who gets some of that, federal money especially, is sort of doing the core of the program.
And for us, the core is really this moment, this moment in the exam room when the doctor and the parent and the child are in there together and the doctor says to a parent, you know, do you read with your child, you know?
reading aloud is probably the most important thing you can do to help them do well in school later.
That moment is the core.
So there are other pieces of the model, buying the books and keeping the books and giving the books at the right time and using the books as diagnostic tools and volunteers in the lobby if they can do that.
But it's really that core of
of a nurse or a doctor who are with a parent in the years before they have, they don't have any other authority figure, any other, often any other regular contact with anybody who's in a, I hate to use the word authority, but anyone who's important to them in a professional way and leveraging that moment to talk about reading is what Reach Out and Read does.
It's a very big ask, you know, if you think that a pediatrician or a nurse practitioner has 11 minutes, 12 minutes to do an exam, to give the shots, to ask if there's any other problems, you know, to talk about seat belts and bike helmets, and we're asking them for a minute.
They want one minute.
Yeah.
And it's a, you know, in every one of those 200, 2075 sites, it's a significant ask.
We're looking for two things.
You need that one minute, and for the life of the program for each individual, which is for a kid, it's from six months to five years.
Uh-huh.
You're looking for 25 bucks.
Ten bucks.
Twenty-five dollars to buy.
Twenty-five bucks, I guess.
Twenty-five dollars.
Ten bucks.
Yeah.
So really, you're not asking for a whole heck of a lot here, are you, in terms of?
Not for any individual clinic.
When I see it globally, where it adds into, you know, huge numbers.
But it's a small, it's a small, it's a, I think we get a lot of bang for the buck.
You know, the time.
You're looking for the one minute.
Right.
But if you go to some, some HMO, like Kaiser,
who measures every second of a well-child visit, and you ask them for a minute of their well-child visit, it's a huge ask.
So Kaiser sees, you know, Kaiser has, we're doing business with Southern California Kaiser, which has 89 clinics and hospitals, and so you add up all the minutes we're asking for, we're asking for a lot.
And every minute to them is money.
Oh, yeah.
and they really have to be persuaded that... As Barry says, they have to be persuaded that it's part of medicine, that literacy is part of pediatrics.
Oh, he loves to talk.
He's the idea man.
But he...
He's done very well by, first with Kaiser in Southern California and now starting a major initiative in all of Los Angeles.
He's ramrodded that through, which is pretty impressive.
Well, I think we've got some good stuff here.
What I'm going to have to do, I want to have, this is like three hours of tape.
I'm going to go back and transcribe it and then assess it and start writing this and then come back with it.
Sure.
And then I want to, I mean,
I'm really planning to give this a nice, good run.
Something like 5,000 words is a good run.
Uh-huh.
And a book that will be about 80,000 or 90,000 words.
You never have a man.
Right.
Well, I feel like we have... Anyway, we can get people to talk about it.
Well, my books do...
Right.
I mean, we need help on several fronts, you know, and name recognition is great for us.
Well, I know you've been written about everywhere, but I really haven't seen any of a book, a general type thing, so it's a great opportunity for me.
I am bringing in a few other aspects of physicians who are being taught, medical students, the power of narrative and teaching.
Yeah, that's a... How reading the classics makes them better
better doctors and diagnosticians and listeners.
So it's part of the whole... I'm talking to Helen Vendler at Harvard, and she's the top poetry critic in the world.
Is poetry still relevant in our lives?
She's a great mentor to us because she keeps us tied to the importance of reading.
She always, always speaks about the love of reading.
when she talks about reach out and reading.
Many of us get mired in the technical details, and she comes back every time to the love of reading.
Good.
I don't know if you've ever seen her do a training, but... I just met her today for the first time.
Yeah.
She goes... Can I keep you for one more second?
So she goes into a room of...
a hundred, this is a Grand Rounds opportunity.
We've kind of insinuated ourselves into this Grand Rounds.
You don't mind if I shoot a picture, do you?
Go ahead.
Into this Grand Rounds opportunity, which is, you know, in medicine, that's where they teach you how to take out the appendix.
Put your wallet away.
So she goes in, so there's like a hundred sleepy,
Yeah, fine.
Residents, and there's like, you know, 20 grumpy attendings who are supposed to be supervising, and they're required to come to this Grand Rounds every week and learn something new.
And so we've insinuated ourselves into this, you know, and so Perry is our main sort of Grand Rounds speaker.
So she goes in, and you just see this room full of sleepy, tired residents.
And she turns out the lights and she puts up her first slide, her first PowerPoint slide, which is a copy of Goodnight Moon, the cover of the book Goodnight Moon.
And she just starts in a great green room.
And you just hear this collective sigh across the whole auditorium.
And everybody remembers this book from their childhood.
And she's got them for the next hour, you know?
Is she doing that around here?
Those opportunities only come like 15 times a year.
She probably has one on her schedule somewhere in the future.
I wouldn't mind coming to one in Alaska.
Yeah, but she's magical in that way.
I think it's better for me to see it than to... It would be a perfect way, actually, to enter into this.
I'm always thinking, how am I getting into the chapter?
Well, if you could see her do a training.
So it's a training thing I'm looking for?
Well, that's called the Grand Rounds, which is the most formal of the training opportunities that we have.
We do other trainings where you just go and sit around a table like this.
So you think you'll have one scheduled over the next couple of months?
You'll have to ask her.
She does her own schedule.
So it's called the Grand Rounds of Training Opportunities.
And how long does it normally run?
A couple of hours?
An hour.
You're pretty structured.
Good.
All right, sir.